Douglas Zimmerman/SFGATE
SAN FRANCISCO (BCN)

Two adults were rescued from the surf at Ocean Beach in San Francisco Sunday, firefighters reported on Twitter at 5:25 p.m.

Both victims were caught in a rip current and rescued by Golden Gate National Recreation Area lifeguards and San Francisco Fire Department's Ocean Rescue.

Both will survive, firefighters said.

Copyright © 2021 Bay City News, Inc. All rights reserved. Republication, rebroadcast or redistribution without the express written consent of Bay City News, Inc. is prohibited. Bay City News is a 24/7 news service covering the greater Bay Area.

Copyright © 2021 by Bay City News, Inc. Republication, Rebroadcast or any other Reuse without the express written consent of Bay City News, Inc. is prohibited.

02
The week in classical: La clemenza di Tito; Current, Rising review – back to reality
The joy was being back. The sorrow, obligatory distancing leaving banks of seats empty, was to share the experience with so few. The Royal Opera House opened last Monday, the first day theatres could function again, with a new production of Mozart’s La clemenza di Tito (1791), conducted by Mark Wigglesworth, directed by Richard Jones and designed by Ultz. It was the company’s first since 2002.

This opera seria – the form celebrates nobility, dignity and, in this instance, clemency – has never won great popularity. Yet Mozart’s late opera, brilliant in musical unity and psychological complexity, can be the richest of all. Wagner, not always right, called it “stiff and dry”. Had he encountered Jones he might have chosen other adjectives. Here is a work dripping with emotion, thwarted honour, stymied intention. In the right hands, you believe these characters.

The stark Jones-Ultz aesthetic won’t charm strict traditionalists. Yet, minor excesses and first-night bumpiness aside, it speaks powerfully and perceptively. As ever with this team (including lighting director Adam Silverman and movement director Sarah Fahie), the staging shows forensic attention to detail.

Current, Rising is unlike anything. Go. The earth really did move, I swear

Classical Rome is indicated by the white pop-up facade of a colonnaded portico. Senators in tweed suits, and a two-roomed interior densely shaded in sage green and brown, place the action in the middle of the last century. With a nod to ancient deities, the emperor Tito arrives like Jupiter come to earth, godlike aura intact, to ambush Servilia, in nylon overall, in the pasta shop where she works. She has other ideas: her honesty, a rare commodity in the face of high office, exhilarates him to the point of laughter.

Tragedy is averted when Tito forgives those who have conspired against him. The question so rigorously investigated here – a joint result of the musical as well as directorial approach – is what it means to be good when so much in life makes us bad. How and why has this emperor, who once killed a man, now put clemency above all else? How, in turn, can sweet Sesto love, to the point of treachery, the ghastly, conniving Vitellia?

Gallery: 20 cult movies critics hated (Espresso)

As Tito, the tenor Edgaras Montvidas, a former ROH Jette Parker young artist, invested the role with fire, vanity and self-doubt. The mezzo-soprano Emily D’Angelo proved an agile, gauche, tormented Sesto, in command of the role’s wide vocal range. As Vitellia, Nicole Chevalier gave us a creature in meltdown, erupting with regret and frustration, challenged by the lowest notes but soaring at the top. Angela Brower’s sympathetic Annio, Christina Gansch’s plucky Servilia and Joshua Bloom’s tough Publio were expertly taken.

With Wigglesworth keeping the pace brisk but not hasty, bringing out the intricate inner string figurations and opting for the more delicate harpsichord continuo (rather than the meatier fortepiano), the orchestral playing had intensity and clarity, matching the staging itself. Woodwind, including the dazzlingly played clarinet obbligato solos in both acts, horns, trumpets and timpani all played with panache. The ROH chorus mustered as much volume and energy as they could, for distancing reasons hidden away offstage (at the back of the stalls?). You can pay to watch La clemenza di Tito online until 20 June. Nothing, it has to be said, equals being there and feeling the air, if not the earth, move.

In sharp contrast, Current, Rising, described as the world’s first opera in hyperreality, turns the whole experience of opera into a personal and immersive mystery. Wearing a VR headset, and admitted to the 15-minute session with only three other people, we the audience turn protagonist. Only the soundtrack is fully determined. We look and move as we like (if we dare; hyperreality can make the susceptible quake, especially when wearing a face mask as well).

Inspired by the liberation of Ariel at the end of Shakespeare’s The Tempest, the pioneering video artist Netia Jones has created a spectacular, surreal and apocalyptic world, set to ethereal, bewitching music by Samantha Fernando. The soprano Anna Dennis sings Melanie Wilson’s economical text, with Chroma ensemble conducted by Richard Baker. This collaboration with Figment Productions and Royal Holloway, University of London runs until 10 June. It’s unlike anything. Go. The earth really did move, I swear. It definitely rumbled. Thanks to my ROH VR buddy Mark for keeping me upright.

Star ratings (out of five)

La clemenza di Tito ★★★★

Current, Rising ★★★★

Current, Rising is at the Linbury theatre, Royal Opera House, London, until 10 June

03
Current refinance rates on May 21, 2021: Rates ratchet higher
a house with a lawn in front of a building: Jeff Greenberg/Getty© Provided by CNET Jeff Greenberg/Getty
A number of important mortgage refinance rates made gains today. Both 15-year fixed and 30-year fixed refinances saw their mean rates climb. In addition, the average rate on 10-year fixed refinance also moved up. Refinance interest rates are never set in stone -- but rates have been at historic lows. If you're looking to get a good rate, now is an excellent time to refinance a house. Before getting a refinance, remember to consider your personal needs and financial situation, and speak with different lenders to find the best one for you.

a house with a lawn in front of a building© Jeff Greenberg/Getty 30-year fixed refinance rates
The current average interest rate for a 30-year refinance is 3.15%, an increase of 6 basis points compared to one week ago. (A basis point is equivalent to 0.01%.) One reason to refinance to a 30-year fixed loan from a shorter loan term is to lower your monthly payment. If you're having difficulties making your monthly payments currently, a 30-year refinance could be a good option for you. Be aware, though, that interest rates will typically be higher compared to a 15-year or 10-year refinance, and you'll pay off your loan at a slower rate.

15-year fixed-rate refinance
The average rate for a 15-year fixed refinance loan is currently 2.44%, an increase of 5 basis points compared to one week ago. With a 15-year fixed refinance, you'll have a larger monthly payment than a 30-year loan. However, you'll also be able to pay off your loan quicker, saving you money over the life of the loan. You'll also typically get lower interest rates compared to a 30-year loan. This can help you save even more in the long run.

10-year fixed-rate refinance
The average rate for a 10-year fixed refinance loan is currently 2.44%, an increase of 6 basis points compared to one week ago. A 10-year refinance will typically feature the highest monthly payment of all refinance terms, but the lowest interest rate. A 10-year refinance can help you pay off your house much faster and save on interest in the long run. Just be sure to carefully consider your budget and current financial situation to make sure that you can afford a higher monthly payment.

Where rates are headed
We track refinance rate trends using information collected by Bankrate, which is owned by CNET's parent company. Here's a table with the average refinance rates reported by lenders across the US:

Average refinance interest rates Product Rate Last week Change 30-year fixed refi 3.15% 3.09% +0.06 15-year fixed refi 2.44% 2.39% +0.05 10-year fixed refi 2.44% 2.38% +0.06
Rates as of May 21, 2021.

How to find the best refinance rate
It's important to understand that the rates advertised online may not apply to you. Your interest rate will be influenced by market conditions as well as your credit history and application.

Having a high credit score, low credit utilization ratio, and a history of consistent and on-time payments will generally help you get the best interest rates. Researching interest rates online is always a good idea, but you'll need to connect with a mortgage professional to get your exact refinance rate. Also remember to account for potential fees and closing costs.

Since the beginning of the pandemic, a lot of lenders have been stricter with who they approve for a loan. As such, you may not qualify for a refinance -- or a low rate -- if you don't have a solid credit rating.

To get the best refinance rates, you'll first want to make your application as strong as possible. The best way to improve your credit ratings is to get your finances in order, use credit responsibly, and monitor your credit regularly. Don't forget to speak with multiple lenders and shop around to find the best rate.
When should I refinance?
Most people refinance because the market interest rates are lower than their current rates or because they want to change their loan term. Interest rates in the past few months have been at historic lows, but that's not the only thing you should be looking at when deciding whether to refinance.
A refinance may not always make financial sense. Consider your personal goals and financial circumstances. How long do you plan on staying in your home? Are you refinancing to decrease your monthly payment, pay off your house sooner -- or for a combination of reasons? And don't forget about fees and closing costs, which can add up.
Note that some lenders have tightened their requirements since the beginning of the pandemic. If you don't have a solid credit score, you may not qualify for the best rate.Refinancing can be a great move if you get a good rate or can pay off your loan sooner -- but consider carefully whether it's the right choice for you
So You Want to End the Conversation?
With vaccination spreading across the United States, social life has begun to bend toward a semblance of normalcy: dinner parties, restaurants, spontaneous encounters with strangers, friends and colleagues on the street or in the office. It’s exciting but also slightly nerve-racking.

“I think there will be a period of heightened anxiety as we meet people face-to-face again,” Adam Mastroianni, a fifth-year Ph.D. student in psychology at Harvard, told me (over the phone). “I’ve heard this from a lot of my friends, that we're worried: Have we forgotten how to be with other people?”

I’d called Mr. Mastroianni for some help in rediscovering this ancient calculus. In March, he and his colleagues Daniel Gilbert, Gus Cooney and Timothy Wilson published a paper in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences — “Do conversations end when people want them to?” — on one of the stickier aspects of human interaction. Our conversation has been edited for brevity and clarity.

What got you interested in this subject?

Years ago, I was getting ready for a party and I thought to myself, “I don't want to go to this party, because I know at some point, inevitably, I'm going to be talking to somebody and I’m going to want to stop and go talk to somebody else, and there won't be any polite way of executing that social maneuver. Then I got to thinking: What makes me think that I’m so special? What if the other person feels the same way, and we’re both stuck talking to each other because we mistakenly think the other person wants to continue?

How do you begin to quantify this?

For our paper, we ran two main studies. In the first, we asked a big sample of people to recall the last conversation they’d had and to tell us about it: Was there any point in that conversation when they felt ready for it to end? When was that? Or if the conversation ended sooner than desired, how much longer did they want it to go? And we had them guess those same answers for the other person. In our second study, we brought people into the lab and had them talk to somebody new. Afterward, we asked both people the same questions, had them guess what they thought the other person wanted and compared their responses.

A few things were really consistent. One was that most people reported that the conversation didn't end when they felt ready for it to end; about two-thirds would have preferred it to end sooner. In fact, only 17 percent of people felt the conversation ended when they wanted it to. And those people rarely overlapped; in only 2 percent of conversations were both people satisfied with when it ended.

Why was that?

Two reasons. The first is that people don’t want to talk for the same amount of time; we can’t both get what we want if we want different things. The second problem is that people didn’t know what the other person wanted.

And we can’t easily ask each other and find out: “Hey, I want this conversation to end now, how about you?” It’s the classic Prisoner’s Dilemma, and the prison is politeness.

If people had perfect information — which they could have, if they just told each other what they wanted — we very likely wouldn’t have the disconnect between what people want and what they get.

That sounds a lot like where we are with mask-wearing these days. I’m vaccinated, and highly unlikely to catch or spread the coronavirus. Yet I still wear a mask, even outdoors sometimes — why? Who or what am I protecting?

If I’m running past someone who is wearing a mask, out of politeness to them I’m going to put my mask up. It’s obviously ridiculous. But the fact that they’re wearing a mask suggests to me that they feel that it’s the right thing to do. And I don’t want to signal to that person that I don’t care about their choice or that I think their choice is bad. There’s something that seems kind of confrontational about even passing somebody on the sidewalk who’s wearing a mask when you’re not, and I don’t want to have that confrontation. So I end up doing this thing that I don’t think is actually important; it’s purely signaling deference to another person.

But aren’t you preaching to the converted? Their mask signals that they’re thoughtful, polite and likely vaccinated. It’s hazier when one of you is unmasked: Are they (or you) vaccinated and expressing genuine liberation? Or unvaccinated and expressing, shall we say, independence? The health risk is still negligible. What you really want to know in that moment is, Are you vaccinated? But decorum keeps us from asking directly.

Yeah, it is remarkable how much of a focal point this has become during the pandemic, because it is the single most public thing that you do. It's like wearing a T-shirt that says something on it — but right now we’re all unsure of what the T-shirt says. Do I put it on or do I not?

Your research concluded that basically 98 percent of all conversations end with at least one person dissatisfied with the length. So why do we even bother?

What we’re finding is that the people who said they wanted to continue a conversation were not the people who felt cut off; they still had a lovely time and left wanting more. It wasn’t so much like they felt rejected. It was more, like, I had a delicious piece of cheesecake and I could have had another — but the one that I had was really great, and so I’m feeling good.

You leave the party, or conversation, while you’re still having fun.

It’s better to leave wanting more cheesecake than it is to leave having eaten too much cheesecake.

Also, it turns out that you have much more fun talking to a stranger. When you talk to a friend or your romantic partner, maybe sometimes you argue. When you talk to someone new, you become sort of the best version of yourself, and it’s kind of fun to be that self.

What have you learned personally from your years of studying conversation?

That I should be spending way less time trying to play fourth-dimensional chess in my mind during my conversations, and just try to pay more attention and let them unfold naturally — and take solace in the fact that people really enjoy these conversations, a lot more than they expected to. Conversation is the building block of our social life; it’s part of what makes life worth living, interacting with other humans. The more that we think about ‘Should I stay or should I go,’ the more we drain some of that fundamental joy out of our interactions with other people, you know?

What we’re metabolizing lately
This interview on NPR with Norm Carson, chief executive of an Arizona company that for nearly 40 years has sold audiovisual equipment under the name Covid Inc.: “When Your Company is Named Covid, You’ve Heard All the Jokes.”

How and when to go about viewing the Super Flower Blood Moon of 2021. (Hint: It helps if you live in Oceania, Hawaii, eastern Asia or Antarctica.)

According to researchers at the University of California, Los Angeles, there are at least 65 creatures, including humans, that make a laugh-like sound: “There could be more that, we think, are out there. Part of the reason they probably aren’t documented is because they’re probably really quiet, or just in species that aren’t well studied for now.”

Some of us were wondering — and now we know — why the iPhone’s “snooze” button provides exactly nine minutes of snoozing.

Jill Lepore, in The New Yorker, provides a brief and compelling history of burnout: “May there one day come again more peaceful metaphors for anguish, bone-aching weariness, bitter regret, and haunting loss.”

What went wrong in the Suez Canal, from a fluid dynamics perspective, courtesy of the Practical Engineering channel on YouTube.

All about the “cartoonishly evil-looking” amblypygid, sometimes known as the whip spider or tail-less whip scorpion but which, as Eric Boodman writes in Undark, is “neither spider nor scorpion.”

If you prefer true spiders, there’s this BBC video segment on how some make use of electric fields to get around.

Science in The Times, 100 years ago
02
4 Instant ways to revive a dating app conversation
When talking to someone on a dating app, there is this aspect of unaccountability. Since you two hardly know each other and have never met, you both aren’t really accountable to each other. But what happens when you meet a really cute person and instantly hit it off with them but after a point, the conversation dies down?At such times, when your conversation has become stale and you desperately want to revive it somehow, there are some clever ways through which you can spark their interest again. Check out these 4 ways to restart a conversation with someone you met on an online dating app.a person using a laptop computer sitting on top of a bed© Provided by Pinkvilla
Be straightforwardSince you two haven’t really ever met, you can be pretty direct with them and shed your inhibitions and shyness. If you want to meet them or simply start a flirting game with them, then tell them so directly and in a straightforward manner.Send them your numberIf you feel safe and confident enough, then you can always send them your number to take the conversation to the next level and to instantly revive it. Giving them your number will make them realise that you are still very much interested in them and in the conversation.a hand holding a cellphone© Provided by Pinkvilla
Tell them you’ve been busyThere can be tons of reasons why you didn’t get time to message them. You can simply tell them that you’ve been busy with work or at home. Giving them an explanation for your lack of interest in the conversation might make them understand your point of view and make them interested in you again.Ask them a questionWhen you ask someone a question, the person is instantly compelled to respond. Thus, the easiest way to get a reply and to restart a dead conversation is to ask them a question, be it about a favourite TV show or about politics or about anything that you two have in common.Also Read: 4 Sure shot ways to get out of the friend zone

03
Hidden Gems: Author considers how a decades-long conversation shaped the nation
Akhil Reed Amar's "The Words That Made Us: America's Constitutional Conversation, 1760-1840" is the rarest of things -- a constitutional romance. Amar, an eminent professor of law and political science at Yale, has great affection for his subject as a text that is worthy of loving engagement by scholars and the public at large. His 700-page narrative covers the "main constitutional episodes" that Americans faced as they revolted against Britain, created a Constitution and Bill of Rights, and built a new nation. Amar argues that the rebellious British subjects sparked a decades-long "constitutional conversation," which eventually drew in men such as John Adams, George Washington, Alexander Hamilton, Thomas Jefferson, James Madison and Chief Justice John Marshall. His book appears at a time when the Constitution has been criticized for its suppression of the revolution's popular impulses, its undemocratic features such as the electoral college, its embeddedness in slavery and its deliberate exclusion of so many from its iconic invocation of "We the People." Amar's story is more celebratory, but the strength of his argument depends on whether his central metaphor of a conversation accurately captures what is at stake in this book.

"The Words That Made Us" starts on the familiar ground of Massachusetts, and with equally familiar figures such as the young Adams, Massachusetts Bay Gov. Thomas Hutchinson and Boston lawyer James Otis Jr. as they became important characters on differing sides of the coming revolt. These figures were part of a transatlantic conversation between Britain and its North American colonies that emerged from the French and Indian War, a debate whose participants grappled with whether and how Parliament could tax the colonies. Amar argues that the colonists learned they were a nation by conversing with one another -- writing letters, arguing in pamphlets and newspapers, coming together in the Continental Congress, and eventually writing the Declaration of Independence and the Articles of Confederation. It was "America," he argues, not Jefferson, that wrote the declaration and authored independence, as former colonists refined their arguments in countless conversations.

Yet, recent scholarship has unearthed many other origin stories for the forces that unsettled British and North American hierarchies and made revolution possible. Native Americans defended their land in what was then the West. Enslaved people revolted in the British Caribbean -- around the same time as the familiar Massachusetts events. Farmers rebelled against taxes in the North Carolina Piedmont region. All these actors forced questions onto the agenda of the British and the colonists, but few of them produced the kind of epistles that this book examines. Oddly enough, Amar notes that 10 percent of the Continental Army was Black at the close of 1776, without further explication. He is partly aware of these deficits and argues that the voices of Blacks, women and others entered the conversation only in the 19th century-- the subject of his next book -- when figures such as Frederick Douglass finally appear. During the era of Constitution-making, by contrast, "Indian tribes were not active and effective participants in the emerging system of constitutional discourse," at least as he defines it.

"USA 1.0" morphed into what Amar calls "USA 2.0," as Americans used the constitution-making process for the new states to revise the software for their emerging system and eventually craft the 1787 Constitution. Along the way, Amar delivers brilliant chestnuts of interpretation, arguing for instance that revolutionary Americans experimented with ideas that anticipated some elements of the British dominion system. Amar stresses the democratic aspects of their process, including that the federal Constitution was concise enough to be reprinted in newspapers -- at least for those who could read. (Literacy was comparatively high but quite unevenly distributed.) States like Massachusetts also modeled democratic values when they began to write their own fundamental charters by consulting the citizenry at large. Amar is fair-minded in assessing the deficits of the new document, noting for instance that the three-fifths clause buttressed enslavers' power in the House and enabled Jefferson and a succession of enslavers to win the presidency on the backs of the enslaved.

Yet these deficits, for him, are mere contradictions -- irritating bugs in USA 2.0 that would be worked out eventually, rather than features of the system. He curtly dismisses those who disagree, at one point railing against "radical-chic intellectuals" who argue on MSNBC, "with barely suppressed smirks, that Americans revolted in 1776 mainly to protect slavery" --- when in truth well-respected professional historians have engaged in a spirited debate over the role that slavery played in the revolution. Amar loves his subjects -- perhaps a bit too much.

The voluminous third part of "The Words That Made Us" narrows the conversation to historical actors such as Washington, Hamilton, Jefferson, Madison, Marshall and Andrew Jackson -- the kinds of figures who populate constitutional-law professors' worlds -- as they argued over how to interpret the new document. There are quite illuminating discussions of, for instance, Marshall's famous opinion in McCulloch v. Maryland concerning the national bank, where Amar shows how the chief justice modeled constitutional interpretation for the nation using the document's text, structure, history and a pragmatic awareness of the needs of the past and present, in contrast to present-day constitutional originalists' search for the abstruse "public meaning" of 18th century words. But the questions resolved here tend to be those such as who was the better constitutional interpreter (Hamilton beats Jefferson and Madison), or who best saw the logic of the new system (Hamilton and Washington), or whether the court invented judicial review in Marbury v. Madison (no). Amar notes that these men argued in a style that might be easily read by the people, but the populace at large, it appears, has dropped out of the conversation entirely.

"The Words That Made Us" is intended to be a big book, not just in size. Amar freely confesses that he hopes his book will take its place alongside classic works by historians such as George Bancroft, Charles Beard and Gordon Wood. It is too early to make such predictions, but one should note that these classic authors attained their influence and staying power in part by capturing something that characterized their era, as well as something less timebound. In a moment that has produced profound debates on such topics as America's place in a larger world and its racial, ethnic and religious composition, it is open to question whether a book that traverses, often brilliantly, such a delimited range of conversation can capture what was truly at stake for Americans of the founding generation, as well as for ourselves.

Kenneth W. Mack, a historian and a professor of law at Harvard, is the author of "Representing the Race: The Creation of the Civil Rights Lawyer" and a co-editor of "The New Black: What Has Changed --- and What Has Not -- With Race in America."

More News
“The Words That Made Us: America’s Constitutional Conversation, 1760-1840”